1632
The French sponsorship helped Sweden cause extensive damage to Austria. The Swedish army led by Gustaf Adolf triumphed in the Battle of Leipzig, occupied the whole of northern Germany, and thence proceeded to the south. Thanks to Richelieu's political genius and your outstanding loyalty, France was then able to postpone military operations and make better preparations for the battle. In 1632, the Swedish army suffered a great loss: Their prominent leader King Gustaf Adolf fell in the Battle of Luetzen. After his death, commanders Horn and Berngardt assumed command over the Swedish army.
1633
Wallenstein, the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial army, attempted to negotiate with the French and Swedish governments. In consequence, the Emperor discharged him from command. Soon after, Wallenstein was assassinated by officers in the pay of the Viennese court.
1634
After Gustaf Adolf's tragic death, France's Swedish allies gradually gave way to the onslaught of the Imperial army. Sweden was opposed by King Ferdinand's Imperial Bavarian army under the command of General Count Hallas. After successfully taking several cities by force, Hallas and his forces besieged the city of Noerdlingen. Noerdlingen was strategically important and provided great advantages to forces controlling it. The Swedes had to fight the enemy back. They marched major forces to a camp 10 km (6 miles) from Noerdlingen. They decided to block the road connecting Ulm and Noerdlingen, the delivery route for the enemy's food supplies and reinforcements. However, as the Swedes passed a gorge and a forest, the Germans occupied the Albuch mountain, overlooking the Swedes' intended route. Horn initiated an attack, but the Swedes' valour could not counteract the Germans' numerical superiority. Field Marshal Horn became certain that he could not capture the eminence and decided to retreat under cover of his cavalry. The Germans moved into the offensive and crushed the Swedish army. Field Marshal Horn was taken prisoner. After his triumph at Noerdlingen, General Hallas led his forces towards the French border.
1636
Owing to Cardinal Richelieu's efforts, France had so far been spared the perils of war. For the previous five years, France has been preparing for war: forming a battle-worthy army and equipping it with modern firearms and artillery. However, in 1636 the allied powers of Saxony and the Empire gained Magdeburg after a protracted siege and took their stand at the French borders. War was imminent. France was to face one of the best European armies.
"Monsieur,
You have proved quite equal to your mission and are hereby promoted to the rank of colonel. The King believes your squad will hold back the attacking army."

