1618 - 1648

The Thirty Years' War began with the Czech rebellion against Austrian oppression under the rule of the Habsburgers. The Catholic League, a military alliance formed in 1609, advanced against the Czechs. The League comprised German Catholic principalities, Austria and Spain; the Emperor also supported it. At the beginning of the war, the Czechs gained several victories and even took some Viennese suburbs by force. However, the Catholic League managed to regroup its forces and deliver a crushing blow to the enemy. In 1620, the Czech army was shattered in the Battle of the White Mountain. All these events gave Protestant Europe a signal to intervene. In 1625, England, the Netherlands and Denmark offered resistance to the Catholics. France, the old rival of the Habsburger dynasty that ruled Austria and Spain, abundantly financed the Protestant forces. War enveloped most of Europe. The Catholics crushed the Danish forces. England and the Netherlands could not hold back the Catholic union, because their armies were too small and poorly organised. France was threatened with invasion. Cunning politician Cardinal Richelieu managed to ward off this disaster. He entered into an alliance with the King of Sweden, Gustaf Adolf. Richelieu undertook payment of one million livres annually for the "resurrection of free Germany". In 1630, Gustaf Adolf's army initiated a full-scale offensive. In early 1631 they took the whole of Pomerania. In the September of the same year, Sweden achieved a glorious victory in the Battle of Leipzig (Breitenfeld) and the whole of northern Germany was in their hands. In November 1632, the Swedish army crushed forces of the Catholic League in the battle of Luetzen. However, it was a Pyrrhic victory. A talented leader and military reformer, Swedish king and military commander Gustaf Adolf perished in battle. The Swedish forces were disorganised. In August 1634, the Swedish army was defeated in the battle of Noerdlingen. Under these circumstances, France had no choice but to wage war against Austria. The Netherlands, Mantua, Savoy and Venice supported France. At first, the French were forced to defend their lands from invasion, but gradually the French army grew stronger and the battleground shifted to enemy territories. In May 1643, French forces crushed the Spanish army in the Battle of Rocroi, and in 1648 the war ended in disaster for Austria and its allies.

