  Royalists in Scotland were assembling their troops and preparing them for the campaign against London, intending to restore feudal law. The Scottish army commanded by Leslie numbered 18,000 infantrymen and 8,000 cavalrymen. There were many recruits in its ranks, and its military leaders lacked unity.
  On May 26th, 1650, Cromwell was appointed commander-in-chief of the army assigned to the campaign in Scotland. He was aided by General Fleetwood, who commanded the infantry, and cavalry commander Lambert. The army consisted of veterans and numbered 10,500 infantrymen and 5,500 cavalrymen.
  On July 22nd, 1650, Cromwell's army crossed the Scottish border and headed for Edinburgh. Leslie refused to fight, instead trying to exhaust the enemy. The rough climate and shortage of supplies favoured the spreading of disease among the English troops. The army's morale was dwindling. Cromwell tried to lure the enemy into open territory where he could perform flank attacks with the cavalry, but Leslie flouted all attempts to outflank the Scottish troops. Some officers suggested Cromwell should withdraw his troops and put an end to the campaign. However, the commander hoped to achieve considerable results.
  Leslie decided to cut Cromwell's army off from England and attack it from the flank. The Scottish army passed by Dunbar and occupied the heights to the south. The English army's escape route to Barvick was thus in the hands of the Scottish troops. Cromwell wrote, "We are in a very difficult situation. The enemy has locked us in ... and we can get out of here only by a miracle."
  September 3rd, 4 a.m. When the wind cleared away the fog and the moon shone over the left flank of Cromwell's infantry and cavalry, his army attacked the enemy. Though such an offensive action on the part of the English army was quite a surprise to them, the Scottish troops managed to form a strong line and repel the first attack.
  Cromwell ordered the artillery to fire on the left wing of the enemy battle formation, and the right flank cavalry to rush to the aid of the left wing. Then he assumed command of three cavalry regiments and attacked the enemy. The Scottish battle formation was shattered and they could offer no organised resistance. At 5:30 a.m. Leslie's troops wavered and a panicked flight ensued.
  The Scots had 3,000 men killed and 10,000 captured, lost all their artillery and a unit transport. The English lost between 20,000 and 30,000 men.
  Soon after the battle, Cromwell's army occupied Edinburgh. Southern Scotland was thus in English hands.
