1642 - 1651
  The executioner lifted the severed head and presented it to the excited crowd. Thus Charles I, King of England, had ended his life on the block; the mob rejoiced. Many understood that they were witnessing the beginning of a new era that would drastically change the English outlook on life and divide the country into two camps, that of the Royalists and that of the adherents of Parliament. The nobility were preparing a blow in return for the death of their king, which could not go unavenged. They anticipated their victory with pleasure. Soon they would meet their enemies and saturate their blades with the blood of these rebels. Their enemy, the parliamentary army, was not made up of professional soldiers. It was said to consist instead of decrepit footmen, innkeepers and rabble. The outcome of the war seemed predetermined. And yet it all went quite differently. Oliver Cromwell, who managed to create a new army, led the parliamentarian troops. Not only did he assemble armed people and train them, but he also created the very monolith against which the old military system of England would break apart, and from whose foundations a new system would arise, capable of conquering other nations and shattering any enemy.
  The government under Tudor rule had adhered to a policy promoting the development of capitalism. However, a number of mistakes made by Charles I resulted in the inevitable fall of the customs supported by his predecessors in the bloody battles of the civil war.
  The uprising in Scotland in 1637 and 1638 and the ensuing war, during which the Scottish nobility and middle classes together fought for their independence, proved a stepping stone to yet another fratricidal war. The situation became even more aggravated by the national insurrection in Ireland that began in October, 1641. King of England Charles I was forced to leave London.
  On August 22nd, 1642, in Nottingham, the king's colour was raised solemnly. This meant that war had been declared on Parliament under the pretext of suppressing the "rebellion of the Earl of Essex", who was in command of the parliamentary army. In this war, Parliament intended to protect the gains of the revolution from the attempts of the king and his supporters to restore the already obsolete social and political order to the country.
  Feudal nobles formed the basis of the king's army. As a result of this, his main battle force was the cavalry, consisting of well-armed and experienced noblemen. The feudal lords' hatred of the rebels further fired the feudal discord and strengthened the unity of the Royalist camp. The king's cavalry was under the command of talented cavalry leader Prince Rupert.
  In the early days of the war, the parliamentary army consisted of two different units, i.e. mercenaries and county militias. These militias were badly supplied and armed and showed little firmness in battle. They did not need asking to protect their lands, but it was very hard to convince them to fight far from their homes. The army's main weakness was the lack of battle-worthy cavalry.
  Oliver Cromwell played a major role in the new army formation process. His popularity was so great that he was permitted to remain a member of Parliament, and to command the whole of the parliamentary cavalry unit at the same time. According to the "Bill of Renunciation" adopted in 1644, members of Parliament could not hold military positions. Cromwell was an exception.
  Having suppressed the mutinies of the king's supporters in Ireland and Scotland, Cromwell turned the civil war into a more aggressive one. He announced these lands as English provinces.
  Cromwell took command of the "new standard" army that destroyed the old feudal customs in England in the interests of Parliament. At the same time he ruined the revolution, clearing the way for the restoration of royal power and adoption of the constitutional monarchy in the country. 
