1567 - 1609
  In the second half of the 16th century, trade routes shifted from Central Europe to the coast of the Atlantic Ocean. This was a result of the great geographic discoveries of that time. In the given situation, the Netherlands appeared to have favourable conditions for trade and industry. 
  But crippling taxes imposed by the Spanish king drastically hampered the economic development of the Netherlands. The profits Spain received from the Netherlands were four times higher than those it drew from its large overseas colonies.
  At that time, Spain conducted active military operations against England competing for the rule of the sea and predominance in the colonies. The king helped the French Catholics who were fighting the Huguenots. There were strained relations with Germany as well. The war between Spain and Turkey for the rule of the Mediterranean also further complicated the situation in Europe. As a result, the Spanish fleet was drawn away from the Netherlands theatre of war.
  For the purpose of preserving the Netherlands as a part of the Empire, Spain supported the Catholic church and local feudal lords. But the continued Dutch struggle for independence and the scattering of Spanish forces resulted in the beginning of upheaval and a full-scale war for the independence of the Netherlands. 
  The commanders of the Dutch revolution, William of Orange and later his son Maurice of Orange, hired mercenaries who would normally be dismissed at the end of a campaign. However, towards the end of the war Maurice of Orange created a regular army which utterly defeated the Spanish king's mercenaries. Only then could the Netherlands gain their independence and in future greatly influence the economic and political development of western civilization.
  Along with the improvement of the performance of firearms came a change of battle tactics for certain army units. The new tactics demanded new forms of infantry and cavalry organisation. In the later stages of the war for independence, the Netherlands succeeded in creating the best regular army and fleet in Europe.
