 In the spring of 1644 on the territory of the northern and eastern shires, a break was achieved in favour of Parliament. Cromwell's forces of the so-called Eastern Association cooperated with Lord Fairfax's army and the Scottish to attain a certain success, winning a large territory from the Royalists. The troops under Fairfax's command besieged the city of York. 
The king was forced to suspend combat operations in the west and detach an army under Rupert to the north, aiming to unite with troops under Newcastle operating there, and relieve York. 
Parliamentarian and Scottish troops concentrated to the west of York at Marston Moor numbered about 20,000 infantrymen commanded by Crafford, Baile and Leven, and 7,000 cavalrymen under Fairfax, Cromwell and Leslie. 
The Royalist army under Newcastle also had 7,000 cavalrymen, but only 11,000 infantrymen, half as many as Parliament.             
Having deployed their formations, neither side was eager to initiate an all day attack. The battle was fought by artillery on both sides. "There was so much fire," a contemporary wrote, "that it seemed all the air turned into a fire tempest." Evening was drawing near. Rupert's horsemen were about to dine. At this very moment, around 9 p.m., Cromwell attacked Rupert's cavalry. Keeping his head, Rupert counterattacked with his major forces. The two cavalries clashed. Rupert's broke away from its infantry, while the infantry under Crafford backed Cromwell. When Leslie rushed to help Cromwell, encompassing the right flank of the royalist cavalry, the prince had no forces left to fight back the attack and his cavalry fell apart, "as dust". 
An unfavourable situation developed in the centre and left wing of the parliamentary battle array. Fairfax's squadrons were overthrown by the front line of Goring's cavalry, who doggedly pursued the fleeing enemy. Baile's infantry was in a dangerous situation too. 
The crisis of the battle was finally resolved for Parliament owing to the successful tactical manoeuvring of Cromwell's cavalry.      
A succession of counterattacks led first to the second, then the first line of Goring's cavalry being smashed, as the latter was returning from its pursuit of Fairfax's squadrons. Then it was the turn of the Royalist infantry.   
The battle ended in the total destruction of the Royal forces. The Royalists had 6,000 men killed and wounded, and 1,500 were taken prisoner. The army of the Parliament had 1,500 killed men and wounded. 
Due to the victory of Marston Moor, the whole north of England was now under the control of the Parliament. The king had lost a substantial part of his forces. The victory inspired people to continue the fight against the king and his followers. 
  
