 Dutch military operations developed successfully at sea, where the navy twice defeated the Spanish fleet. On land, however, the Spanish siege of Leiden continued. 
The basic aim of the campaign of 1574 outlined by Prince William of Orange was to relieve Leiden. His brother Louis of Nassau, having recruited mercenaries in Germany, was to advance to Maastricht, and in case of failure there, to set off for Delft to join William's troops.     
Upon hearing of William's plans, the Spanish decided to prevent the Louis' troops from entering into Brabant, and from uniting his troops with those of William, who concentrated 6,000 infantrymen on the island of Bommel. To reach this goal, 8,000 horsemen and an appropriate number of infantrymen were hired in Germany. The command was commissioned to Sancho de Avila.    
In late February of 1574, in a heavy snowstorm, a mercenary army headed by Louis crossed the Rhine and headed for Maastricht. On the way to the Maas river, more than a thousand mercenaries deserted. The situation was further aggravated by the impossibility to cross the Maas due to the ice drift.  
The forces of Louis dwindled, and the numbers of his rival grew. This was why the Dutch commander refused to go for the first objective, and on April 8th advanced along the right bank of the Maas river to unite with his brother's troops.    
On April 13th, Louis and his 6,000 infantry and 2,000 cavalrymen positioned themselves in the region surrounding Mook village. Avila decided to foil the Dutch commander's manoeuvre and bar his way back to the Netherlands. Avila possessed only 4,000 infantrymen and less than 1,000 horsemen. On the day of the battle, however, he received reinforcements more than 1,000 strong, and another 5,000 were due to arrive on the morning of April 15th. Consequently, the balance of power was liable to change in favour of the Spanish. But it was risky to wait, for Louis could make use of the time this bought him and evade the clash to join his brother. Therefore, the Spanish military leader made a firm decision to bring the battle to its conclusion.         
On the dawn of April 14th, the troops on both sides lined up for battle. Early in the morning, the inferior Spanish forces attacked the Louis' infantry on the trench line. Despite clashes lasting for several hours, neither side engaged their major forces in the battle. Control of the village of Mook passed back and forth between the two sides.    
The Spanish commander, fearing to let his enemy slip, ordered all his infantry subdivisions to attack the infantry of Louis. The Spanish fell on their knees and prayed, then charged with all their might, only to overthrow the enemy infantry. 
Seeing the defeat of his infantry, Louis commanded his cavalry to attack. With the first rush, the Spanish mounted riflemen were smashed and fled in panic. However, after the first salvo, Louis' carabineers had to turn back and retreat to reload their weapons. The Spanish mounted pikemen and German black cavalrymen made use of this time to counterattack and overthrow the stronger rival.        
Louis assembled the remnants of his cavalry and led them to the final battle, where he met his death.
As a result of the battle, the Dutch lost a considerable part of their forces and the possibility to carry out any intensive military operations. 
Yet Avila was unable to make use of the great tactical success of his Spanish army due to a mutiny. The government had owed mercenaries their pay for three years, but still there was no sign of money.    

