In the campaign of 1600, Maurice of Orange transferred military operations to Flanders by deploying his army of 15,000 - 20,000 in a Philippine fort on June 21st. Then, accompanied by the fleet, they proceeded along the coastline and besieged Newport.    
The Spanish ruler Archduke Albert advanced from Antwerp to help the Newport garrison. His army comprised 10,000 infantrymen and 1,500 cavalry units. 
On July 2nd, 1600, having acquired knowledge of the Spanish approach, Maurice raised the siege of Newport and set off toward the enemy. At 11 a.m., the Spanish cavalry stopped 5 kilometres from Newport bay, waiting for the slowly moving infantry and artillery. Maurice used the Spanish loss of time to finish deploying his army.   
The battle was initiated by the harquebusiers of the vanguard. At this time, the Spanish troops tried to pass along the coastline and deprive the Dutch of a chance to use the favourable wind direction for shooting. But the artillery fire from the Dutch vessels caused the Spanish considerable losses, and the rising tide was beginning to flood the coastline. Albert ordered his infantry subdivisions to retreat.    
At 3 p.m., when the Spanish subdivisions were retreating, Maurice ordered his cavalry and pikemen to assault the enemy. A severe clash occurred in the middle of the troop formation, the outcome of which was uncertain, but generally seemed unfavourable to Maurice's major forces. At this time, the right flank Spanish subdivision supported by the cavalry was moving forward. The left flank of the Dutch vanguard was unable to oppose that pressure. The battle was nearing a crisis.     
To support the left flank of the rearguard, Maurice despatched two cornets from the major forces cavalry, and engaged the rearguard infantry into the battle. 
The Spanish cavalry, almost crushed under the pressure of the Dutch, started to retreat. Thus the Spanish infantry lost its much-needed support, and a renewed attack by Dutch forces backed by artillery fire broke the formation and forced it into a retreat formation, which quickly became a chaotic flight.
The Spanish suffered defeat, losing 4,000 soldiers, with 1,000 wounded. The Dutch losses reached 2,500 men.     

