The key events of the war were expected to take place in the region of Izmail. The Turks demonstratively moved their large forces there. Taken in by this trick, commander-in-chief Potyomkin concentrated the might of the Russian army there. This was what the Turks were waiting for. Their army of 100,000 commanded by Yusuf Pasha (Yusuf means brilliant) was preparing to defeat the Austrians to get their hands on the Russians afterwards.   
The Austrian forces were commanded by Prince Coburg. On finding out from scouts that the Turks were going to advance 100,000 men against his 18,000, the prince hurriedly despatched a courier to General Suvorov begging for help. A 7,000 - 8,000 strong Russian army division sent by the general hurried to aid the ally.  
At first glance, there was no way to advance on the Turks. The enemy positions were suitable for defensive combat. But Suvorov spotted the weak points at once. The enemy was divided into three camps: one at Tyrgu-Kukulie village, one at the Kryngu-Meilor forest, and the third at the town of Martineshti on the bank of the river Rimnik. The forests and ravines serving the camps as protection would also hinder them from transporting troops to other camps if one of them were assaulted. The river Rymna could be crossed without being spotted by the enemy, as the Turks had failed to place even a single lookout post on the river bank. 
Suvorov decided to strike the enemy in stages: First, the Russians would attack the positions at Tyrgu-Kukulie and capture them. The Austrians would meanwhile move towards Kryngu-Meilor forest. Then the Austrians and Russians together would attack the adversary at Kryngu-Meilor. Finally, the united forces would advance on Martineshti.    
In the first camp the Turks had about 12,000 men, in the second 40,000. On capturing the first camp, Suvorov's division hurried to Kryngu-Meilor. On their way they discovered there was strong Turkish artillery at Bogzy village, to the south-west of Kryngu-Meilor. It kept the approaches to basic enemy fortifications under fire. After occupying this position, the Russians were just in time to help the Austrians. The enemy was pressing them all along the front, and they were just about to waver. Uniting their forces, the allies managed to throw the Turks back behind their fortifications.      
We can only guess how the assault might have gone if the infantry had initiated it, for Suvorov noticed that the Turkish fortifications had not been completed: The ditch was shallow, the embankment low. He decided to assault with the cavalry. In a short period of time, the horsemen had covered the area shelled by the Turkish artillery and rifles, and broken through into the enemy camp. Stunned by these actions, the Turks faltered and failed to open fire on the infantry, which was already crossing the ditch and hurrying to help the cavalry. The Turkish army wavered and started fleeing.  
The Turkish losses amounted to 10,000 killed. The allies lost a total of 1,000 men killed and wounded. In a couple of days, Yusuf Pasha gathered the rest of his once 100,000 strong army. It now counted only 15,000 men.    
     
